---
layout: /default.html
title: >-
  Network Error Logging: Client-side measurement of end-to-end web service reliability
description: >-
  NSDI 2020, Santa Clara, California
---

# Publication details

<ol class="publications">
<li class="reference">
  <div class="citation_number">[15]</div>
  <div class="citation">
    S Burnett, L Chen, DA Creager, M Efimov, I Grigorik, B Jones, HV Madhyastha,
    P Papageorge, B Rogan, C Stahl, and J Tuttle.

    “Network Error Logging: Client-side measurement of end-to-end web service
    reliability.”

    In <em>Proceedings of the 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
      and Implementation (NSDI 2020)</em>.

    USENIX, February 2020.

    Santa Clara, California.
  </div>

  <div class="downloads">
    <a href="nel-paper.pdf">
    <button type="button" class="btn btn-primary">
      <span class="glyphicon glyphicon-download"></span> PDF
    </button>
    </a>
  </div>
</li>
</ol>

## Abstract

We present NEL (Network Error Logging), a planet-scale, client-side, network
reliability measurement system. NEL is implemented in Chrome and has been
proposed as a new [W3C standard](https://w3c.github.io/network-error-logging/),
letting any web site operator collect reports of clients’ successful and failed
requests to their sites. These reports are similar to web server logs, but
include information about failed requests that never reach serving
infrastructure. Reports are uploaded via redundant failover paths, reducing the
likelihood of shared-fate failures of report uploads. We have designed NEL such
that service providers can glean no additional information about users or their
behavior compared to what services already have visibility into during normal
operation. Since 2014, NEL has been invaluable in monitoring all of Google’s
domains, allowing us to detect and investigate instances of DNS hijacking, BGP
route leaks, protocol deployment bugs, and other problems where packets might
never reach our servers. This paper presents the design of NEL, case studies of
real outages, and deployment lessons for other operators who choose to use NEL
to monitor their traffic.
